---
layout: default
title: 3rd November
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2022-11-03
parent: ZEP meetings
nav_order: 5
---

# 2022-11-03

**Attending:** Josh Moore (JM), Jonathan Striebel (JS), Jeremy Maitin-Shepherd (JMS), Sanket Verma (SV)

## TL;DR

Discussions were held on how to move forward with ZEP1 quickly. The summary can be viewed [here](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/149#issuecomment-1302440391). Then the attendees discussed extensions in V3, and JMS is considering trying with non-zero origin. SV joined the meeting after 30 mins. After that, JS mentioned some high-level issues looming around V3 spec.

**Meeting Minutes:**

* JMS: number of PRs that could be merged into the working draft
  - JS: don't want to just close it
  - JM: can we cross link e.g. JMS' PR? Yes.
  - ==> once all cross-linked close PR.
* JS: when to merge?
  - JM: when it matches the consensus?
  - JS: ok, but don't have merge rights.
  - ==> Let's merge proactively.
* see: https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/149#issuecomment-1302440391
* extensions
  - JMS: thinking of trying with non-0-origin
  - JM: think that's a general principle we should try for all issues/PR is "could it be an extension"
  - JMS: thinking of extensions as plugins? Not exactly.
  - JS: how to influence if an implenentation adopts an extension? if there's a concrete implementation / clear interface
  - JMS: agreed and some obvious ones (codecs) but not clear there will be a broader abstraction
    - JS: "index transformer" _perhaps_
    - or as transformer _if_ multiple of chunking
    - JMS: unfortunate limitation
  - JMS: re: transformers - it doesn't make sense to compose a different storage transform _before_ sharding
     - JS: depends. cache of chunks or shards? also checksum
     - JM: codec is similar
     - JMS: caching enabled in code, but not in zarr metadata
     - JS: that's in spec, yes. "runtime-only" but still before or after
     - JMS: when implementing sharding, would check if it's first
       - want to be able to tell the user "this is the graularity to write"
       - JS: good that it's flexible. like c/f order.
       - JS: mention in implementation "sharding must be first"
     - JMS: composing makes for useful extension point
     - JS: most important point: are we sure enough about the extension points?
- _Sanket joins_ 🧑🏻‍💻
- Jonathan: high-level issues looming
  - paths/URL discussion (needs an issue)
  - global transformers
  - variable chunk length (possibly origin offset)
  - indexing more abstract
  - upgrade path! (`{“extension”: [“@v2-layout”]}`)