---
layout: default
title: 8th September
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2022-09-08
parent: ZEP meetings
nav_order: 1
---

# 2022-09-08

**Attending:** Sanket Verma (SV), Josh Moore (JM), Ward Fisher (WF), Jonathan Striebel (JS), Norman Rzepka (NR), Ryan Abernathey (RA), Dennis Heimbigner (DH), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS)

## TL;DR

This was the first ZEP meeting ever. Representatives from the [Zarr Implementations Council](https://github.com/zarr-developers/governance/blob/main/GOVERNANCE.md#zarr-implementation-council-zic) joined the meeting. Most discussions revolved around [ZEP1](https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html). One of the critical decisions about ZEP1 was to accept it ‘[Provisionally](https://zarr.dev/zeps/active/ZEP0000.html#review-and-resolution)’ and move forward with the implementation in various programming languages.

**Updates:**
- SV: open ("draft") ZEPs:
  - [https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html](https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0001.html)
  - [https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0002.html](https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0002.html)
- SV: Author discussion on all the comments on ZEP0001
  - Have proposed resolutions for a number of those 
  - Meeting again tomorrow to try to finish the list
  - [https://hackmd.io/sOos8rxrRvKCJPbbUKWtwA?view](https://hackmd.io/sOos8rxrRvKCJPbbUKWtwA?view)
  
- SV: Critically propose marking ZEP0001 as "provisionally accepted" after the above are handled and passed by the ZIC
  - Implementations are free (and encouraged!) to start implementing.
  - Any blocking changes could still be handled.
  - Otherwise, "feature freeze".
  - Feedback?
    - RA: process to get to provisionally accepted
    - SV: draft == under review.
      - on vote, can move to provisionally or accepted state.
      - once implemented, moves to final.
      - could move to "deferred" state if the ZIC vetoes
    - WF: "ready to implement" jumped out (and caused anxiety but only since there's too much to do)
    - [https://zarr.dev/zeps/active/ZEP0000.html#review-and-resolution](https://zarr.dev/zeps/active/ZEP0000.html#review-and-resolution)
    - JMS: no substantial changes since early draft
      - JM: editors are preparing a rebuttal (Alistair's paper model)
      - JMS: not sure a paper model is best
      - RA: not in the sense that there's only one round and someone will decide. iterative
        - good to have authors who are organizing.
        - now in revision and we can continue until everyone is happy
        - gone slowly for various reasons (availability, summer, and it's our first time & massive)
        - would be useful to go through the outstanding issues
      - JS: in this cycle and not limited iterations is just the limited time.
        - but for now, trying to make batched changes

**Agenda:**
- JS: **review of memory order decision number-16 from list**
  - zarr's goal is interoperability. therefore propose to keep C & F (benefit for community)
  - could support read only, even with a transpose (if too slow, add a warning?)
  - JMS: agree. but would like an arbitrary permutation.
  - DH: good use case?
  - JMS: dimension that represents time. order you display to the user is logical for them but need not be logical for compression/access patterns.
  - JM/JS: core or extension?
  - RA: that's a key question
  - NR: re: backwards compatibility C/F is in V2 therefore that would need to be in core. but arbitrary could be an extension.
  - RA: but v3 is a chance to break backwards compatibility (explicitly not a goal)
  - NR: upgrade path? so be able to upgrade without re-writing the chunks.
  - RA: v2 will still be supported.
  - WF: that would be the hope, but worry about netcdf & archival -- assuming software will support it without it being expressed somewhere. aspirational sure but makes us nervous.
    - e.g. will future software implement the v2 standard?
  - RA: transform based solution? (but only if we support F) **if** we say the chunks should be backwards compatibility.
  - WF/DH: no one has ever asked for arbitrary. Someone at NOA asks for things that would help their lab. Technical debt. (Won't even request a pull request) See the trap that the HDF group fell into (single-writer-multiple-reader, several orders of magnitude that they are trying to recover from.)
  - JMS: arbitrary seems most natural. pass to `numpy.transpose()`
- WF: shocked at the assertion that there _wouldn't_ be a migration path
- JM: clarification -- were only differentiating if _binary_ transformation is needed
  - **can add _requirement_ to v3 that implementations read v2**
  - WF: requirement of netcdf. can decide if that's a requirement.
  - DH: depends if it's alot. operational definition - "too painful to copy v2 to v3"
  - (for RA): petabytes of data
  - JS: RA proposed transformer strategy - essentially rewriting metadata **formalize it?**
- DH: how comfortable are you not supporting older version?
  - JM: for OME, got agreement but that's a layer higher
  - DH: will there be new implementations without V3 support?
  - NR: think there will be
  - JM: but it's so easy to implement
  - WF: people won't do that...what do we do if a popular implementation doesn't support v2?
    - other packages?
  - RA: recommend storage layer / translation?
  - JM: agreed but that's SHOULD (versus MUST)
  - JMS: only way to force it is a standardization
  - JM: agreed, but we can only do what the spec document allows us (i.e. labeling something as "compliant")
  - JS: it's a new major version and people know what we mean. (as a user, I wouldn't expect support for v2 if an implementation says "v3")
  - WF: convinced myself I'm worrying too much instead:
  - WF: in 18 months how do you know which Zarr is used to open it.
    - JM: metadata file is different (essentially the magic number). The proposal for `.zr3` was currently turned down.
- SV: [data type naming](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/149#discussion_r929140806)
  - JM: dropping the python-ness
  - JMS: helps provide a more nature scheme for some datatypes (and endianness as a codec)
  - no argument against (just "convenient in Python")
  - JM: will need names
  - JMS: in [https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/155](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/155)
  - DH: netcdf ncchar type equivalent to 8-bit ascii, no equivalent in Zarr. Needed? NC uses it all the time. Why not in numpy?
    - JMS: thought numpy has char.
    - RA: revisit char question? JMS: different than varstring
    - RA: where does the encoding go? DH: in an attribute. "ascii" (or "utf-8")
    - RA: used for? DH: you see a lot of flags stored that way.
      - also historical: NC-3 didn't have strings of any type. (arrays of chars workaround)
      - JM: extension mechanism?
      - DH: where the wheel hits the road
      - JMS: just metadata?
      - RA: disagree, influences ...
      - JMS: agreed, but doesn't change how hard it is to implement
      - JM: but need to feel confident that they are low cost so we can change *when* we discuss these things
- JMS: will changes start appearing?
  - JM: Very soon!