---
layout: default
title: 6th October
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2022-10-06
parent: ZEP meetings
nav_order: 3
---

# 2022-10-06

**Attending:** Ward Fisher (WF), Josh Moore (JM), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS), Greg Lee (GL), Jonathan Striebel (JS)

## TL;DR

JM shared that there were some good conversations around OME-Zarr yesterday. The summary is available [here](https://forum.image.sc/t/ome-ngff-community-call-transforms-and-tables/71792/10). WF shared that Kitware is looking for partners and a link to the sign-up form. GL shared that during the CZI Open-Science Summit 2022, he worked on writing tests for Xarray. After this, there was an extensive discussion on URL syntax initiated by JMS.

**Updates:**

  * miscellaneous reading before the meeting (JM)
    - [https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/05/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-1/](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/05/arrow-parquet-encoding-part-1/)
    - [https://github.com/kaitai-io/kaitai_struct/issues/125](https://github.com/kaitai-io/kaitai_struct/issues/125)
  * NGFF (JM)
    - [https://forum.image.sc/t/ome-ngff-community-call-transforms-and-tables/71792/10](https://forum.image.sc/t/ome-ngff-community-call-transforms-and-tables/71792/10)
    - Good conversations around OME-Zarr yesterday
  * Enthusiasm for Kitware (WF)
    - Looking for partners. [Have form on webpage](https://www.kitware.com/contact/project/).
    - Unidata an option. They've mentioned Zarr a couple of times (Kitware Blog).
  * xarray test (GL)
    - during czi conference.
    - release of 2.13 hopefully fixed it all :tada:

**Meeting Minutes:**

* URL syntax? (JMS)
  - helps to figure out the metadata location.
  - Josh: great idea. have several ongoing discussions at the NGFF level
    - current proposal would be to support URIs internally (relative, absolute, remote)
    - however, in V2 
  - JMS: in v3 the root exists
    - though not entirely clear that the new metadata organization is necessary
    - designed for S3 where there's no directory, but other problems exist
  - Josh: _summarized previous discussions for Greg_
  - GL, thoughts on the V3 situation?
  - GL: at the moment, you need helper methods to do that.
  - JM: one proposal was to have the metadata be the main directory which lets you then bootstrap the chunk loading
  - JMS: support multiple?
  - JM: conceivably. as extension or configuration.
  - JM: downside for consolidated metadata is that nothing exists in the metadata hierarchy
    - workaround of having a thin-hierarchy only with references to where the metadata exists
  - JS: losing the ability to be able to next any hierarchy. (everything is a root)
    - JM: are we proposing rolling it back completely
  - JMS: problem is the URI+rootpath metadata
  - JS: walking up the hierarchy would be an option (URL doesn't actually point)
  - JMS: would be nicer if you don't have to perform a search
  - Use case
    - URL case
    - Desktop double click on something
    - Similar issue: **Zips** :warning:
      - JMS: have an additional level
      - JM: except ZipStore v2 assumes the whole zip is a zgroup
      - JS: propose zip is a special case which is _easier_
        - JMS: unless you are mixing volumetric with a zarr then it wouldn't be at the top-level
    - Btree (JMS): need to be able to compose multiple layers (similar to fsspec and double colons)
    - Remote chunk store (or point to V2 chunks)
    - Renaming folders (keep data with arrays)
  - Options
    - Keep "/meta", clients must know
    - Drop "/meta", direct URLs
    - `?param` syntax
    - `#param` syntax
    - Separator syntax (e.g. "`//`")
    - root dir ends in .zarr
    - fsspec `::` separator
    - multiple protocols (git+ssh, zip+zarr)
  - further discussion
    - JS: without /meta and .zarr requirement, you still don't know where the root is
    - JS: if you drop "/meta" then you can't name anything "/data"
      - JMS: could use something more obfuscated 
    - JS: why split?
      - JMS: if you are not using the filesystem (s3 or gcs) and you want to list all the metadata, it's not (as) efficient
    - JM: "data" could be registered in the metadata so it's a known (and configurable) thing
    - WF: NC anything with leading underscore is assumed reserved for the library
      - permitted to create them, but the spec says "please don't"
      - JM: `.z` prefix
      - WF: utilities and tools can scrape everything with that
      - WF: also don't have to put too much thought into new features
      - JMS: would prefer not a `.` prefix because of archiving tools, etc.
      - then `_z`?
    - JMS: root metadata file doesn't really do anything
      - JS: creates ambiguity
      - JM: think it was largely for bootstrapping global plugins (e.g. transformers)
      - JS: perhaps V2 compatibility
      - JMS: not clear you would nest sharding with other transformers. it would be the thing applied to the chunks.
      - JS: the metadata needs to be somewhere, and for that can be at the array level
  - brief summary
    - zarrs are essentially a metadata hierarchy
    - that configure (possibly remote) chunk stores
    - and the root is identified with .zarr