---
layout: default
title: 20th October
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2022-10-20
parent: ZEP meetings
nav_order: 4
---

## 2022-10-20

**Attending:** Ward Fisher (WF), John Kirkham (JK), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS)

* Misc
    * (WF) Working on maintenance netcdf release candidate (`v4.9.1-rc1`). No new features, just bug fixes and improvements.
    * (JMS) Added CMake support to TensorStore
    * Discussion about CMake, dependency management
        * https://cmake.org/cmake/help/book/mastering-cmake/chapter/CDash.html
        * https://github.com/cpm-cmake/CPM.cmake
* (JMS) Path structure
    * Require or encourage root directory to end in .zarr
    * How to name all the metadata files?
    * Root metadata could contain extension information
    * (JK) Mentioned `.zmeta` metadata file with paths to metadata file
        * (JMS) About listing
        * (WF) Possible issues with writing
        * (WF) Spec vs. library tension
        * (JK) Have file expire?
        * (JMS) Handle as read-only
        * (JK) Could also delete as part of writing?
    * (JMS) HDF5 has hierachary and Zarr replicates this
        * Have some array and non-array data next to each other
        * (JK) Examples?
            * (JMS) Segmentations & mesh representations
            * (JMS) Collection of volumes with annotations related to them
        * (WF) Have Zarr hierarchy with non-Zarr?
            * (JMS) Only have single individual arrays
            * (WF) Wouldn't have considered this structure
            * (WF) Does there need to be something in the spec about interleaving data?
            * (WF) Maybe interleaving poses some challenges
            * (JMS) Doesn't NetCDF have extra files as well?
            * (WF) Yes. Extra metadata used to map Zarr model to NetCDF model.
            * (JMS) Reason to use this structure as opposed to Zarr metadata files?
            * (WF) NetCDF supports different formats HDF5, Zarr, etc.
            * (JMS) Have user defined attributes. Types are stored in metadata file? Could those be in zattrs?
            * (WF) Yes. Not sure
        * (JMS) Hierarchy becomes more apparent with V3 as opposed to V2
            * (WF) Groups were a new feature that users were slow to pick up on
            * (JK) Does adding more top-level metadata cause issues?
            * (JMS) Could it contain the metadata?
            * (WF) Maybe include subset of metadata
            * (WF/JMS) Perhaps special case single array use case
        * (JK) How does data relate in non-hierachical form
            * (JMS) Related, but not all Zarr data
            * (JK) Would other kinds of chunk formats (standardizing on kerchunk) be useful
            * (JMS) Meshes probably don't make sense in this way
            * (JMS) Neuroglancer meshes are a good example
            * (JMS) Sparse arrays seem similar in that they might be better handled by being their own file format
            * (WF) NetCDF users mention performance issues in moving to new version. Usually suggest using old NetCDF. Maybe same with V2/V3?
            * (JMS) Want to use V3 (sharding being of value).
            * (JK) Including unstructured binary blobs in Zarr?
            * (JMS) Has a group of files for mesh
            * (JK) Maybe ignore specific paths?
            * (WF) Having mixed media is valuable though can be logisticially tricky
            * (WF) What defines Zarr as a data model? At least need to say some behavior is undefined (mixed media). Ideally ignores mixed media files.
