---
layout: default
title: 23rd March
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2023-03-23
parent: ZEP meetings
nav_order: 17
---

## 2023-03-23

**Attending:** Sanket Verma (SV), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS), Norman Rzepka (NR), Ward Fisher (WF)

## TL;DR:

NR started wondering whether Hailiang’s [ZEP0005](https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0005.html) is in the ZEP scope. Everyone has different thoughts, and SV thought it might be part of [Ryan Abernathey’s ZEP](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps/pull/28). Next, SV presented the draft email that the JMS and JS are supposed to send out soon. And lastly, JMS had some thoughts about bloc being a special codec due to its shuffling nature.

**Updates:**

- Hailiang presented [ZEP0005](https://zarr.dev/zeps/draft/ZEP0005.html) yesterday
    - Check the recording here: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/13xkl-i8pCSnv42KeqX6KLtIRFln5sf6k/view?usp=share_link>

**Meeting Minutes:**

- NR: Does Hailiang’s ZEP in the Zarr scope?
    - JMS: Not possible to evaluate the proposal right now - agree with the scope - maybe it’s not for us to judge it - it could be a metadata convention - doesn’t need to be implemented with Zarr-Python itself
    - NR: Whether it needs to be standardised or not? - Could understand some part of the proposal - may not an extension - because it’s on top of the Zarr (the accumulation attribute)
    - SV: Maybe part of the [Ryan’s ZEP](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps/pull/28)?
    - NR: Trying to find a specific use case and I couldn’t find it - something similar to OME naming conventions
    - JMS: Prefixing OME w.r.t. to OME keys

- SV: ZIC Email
    - JMS: We can remove Zarr-Python implementation's reference from the email
    - NR: You can add Zarrita!
    - SV: Is it in a better state of syncronisation as compared to zarr-python V3 implementation?
    - NR: Yes!
    - JMS: Sure, we can do it!
    - JMS: Reorder metadata to the top and then send the email
    - NR: Sharding as a codec PR: <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/223/> - if it can be merged before the email then it’ll be great!
    - NR: Want to bundle ZEP0002 with ZEP0001 - 
    - SV: Not a good idea! 
    - NR: Alright!
    - NR: Rendering of the read the docs - SV: check this out: <https://zarr-specs--223.org.readthedocs.build/en/223/>

- JMS: Blosc is a special codec! - bytes to bytes codec - the shuffle parameters has some logic - the shuffling is happening in the Zarr V3 - which is weird - adds a weird abstraction - potentially useful for users to specify shuffling manually
    - JMS: Proposed value for the shuffling for the blosc codec: {null, "bit", 1, 2, 3, 4…}
        - Will create an issue or send a PR to the numcodecs repository

- SV: Once the re-ordering (moving metadata section to the top) of V3 is done, we can send out the email
    - NR: I’ve added Zarrita as the reference implementation for V3 in the email!
