---
layout: default
title: ZEP0008
description: URL pipeline syntax
parent: draft ZEPs
nav_order: 8
---

# ZEP 8 — URL pipeline syntax

---

```
Author: Jeremy Maitin-Shepard <jbms@google.com>, Google Research

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2023-09-07
```

## Abstract

This proposal defines a URL pipeline syntax for specifying how to
locate a zarr node, a plain key-value store, or other resources.

## Motivation and Scope

A URL syntax for zarr nodes that is common across multiple zarr implementations
enables users to more easily share dataset locations between different tools.

While in simple cases it is sufficient to specify the zarr node location using
an existing, well-established URL scheme like `file` or `http`, or existing but
less-standard URL schemes like `s3` and `gs`, for nested storage mechanisms like
the ZIP format, and for nodes within a zarr hierarchy, there is no existing
established URL syntax.

Additionally, for implementations that support other data formats than zarr v3,
it may be necessary to also indicate the data format as part of the URL syntax.

This proposal defines a new absolute and relative URL syntax addresses this
need.

## Usage and Impact

Zarr implementations that support this URL syntax are expected to provide an API
for opening a Zarr node at a given URL, and for obtaining the URL corresponding
to an open Zarr node.

Using these APIs, data can easily be shared between different Zarr
implementations that support the proposed URL syntax.

Implementations may also optionally support this syntax for uses
beyond Zarr, such as specifying a bare key-value store or specifying
data in non-zarr formats.

## Detailed description

This ZEP defines a *URL pipeline syntax* that may be optionally supported by
Zarr implementations in order to allow the location of a zarr array or group to
be specified in a convenient, implementation-independent way.

More precisely, it defines a URL syntax that may specify:

- A root key-value store, such as a path within an S3 bucket or a path
  on the local filesystem, e.g. `s3://bucket/path`;

- A nested key-value store, such as a sub-directory within a ZIP file
  within an S3 bucket,
  e.g. `s3://bucket/path/to/archive.zip|zip:path/within/zip/`;

- A zarr v2 or v3 node within a zarr v3 hierarchy within a particular
  key-value store,
  e.g. `s3://bucket/path/to/zarr/|zarr3:path/within/hierarchy/`;

- A non-zarr dataset within a zarr v3 hierarchy within a particular
  key-value store, e.g. `s3://bucket/path/to/image.tiff|tiff:` or
  `s3://bucket/path/to/dataset.n5/|n5:path/within/hierarchy/`.

### Resource kinds

The proposed URL pipeline syntax may refer to several different kinds of
resources:

- `file`: Single file within a key-value store, no specific data
  format.

- `directory`: Single directory within a key-value store, no specific
  data format.

- `dataset`: An array, group, or other dataset with a defined format
  e.g. a zarr array or group, or a [Neuroglancer
  precomputed](https://neuroglancer-docs.web.app/datasource/precomputed/index.html)
  mesh, skeleton, or annotation dataset.

Depending on the URL schemes involved, in some cases the resource kind
can be determined syntatically from the URL alone, while in other
cases it can only be resolved by actually accessing the resource.

### Absolute URL syntax

The proposed "zarr URL pipeline syntax" has the following ABNF grammar:

```
absolute_url_pipeline = root_url *( "|" adapter )
```

where a `root_url` specifies an absolute resource location, such as
`file:/path/to/local/file`, and `adapter` specifies a nested resource using a
specified protocol, such as `zip:path/within/zip`.  The `root_url` and each of
the `adapter` portions are considered "sub-URLs".

For a given `adapter`, the sequence of `root_url` and prior `adapter`
sub-URLs is called the "base URL".

The following `root_url` schemes are defined:

- `file:` as defined by [RFC8089](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8089).

  `file:/absolute/path` and `file:///absolute/path` are supported.

  Implementations that have a *current working directory* MAY support
  the non-standard extension `file:relative/path` where
  `relative/path` is resolved relative to the current working
  directory.

  Implementations SHOULD not support `file://relative/path` since that
  is ambiguous with the `file://hostname/path` syntax defined by
  [RFC8089](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8089).

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

- `http:` and `https:` for generic HTTP servers

  In general, only single-key read operations (corresponding to GET requests)
  are supported.

  For example:

  - `https://example.com/path/to/resource%20name`
  - `https://example.com/path/to/resource?query=value`
  - `https://example.com/path/to/?query=value`

  TODO: Specify how the query string propagates with relative URLs.

  Implementations may choose to heuristically support list operations
  by detecting server support for:

  - HTML directory listings;
  - S3-compatible listing; and/or
  - WebDAV directory listing.

  The resultant resource kind may be either `file` or `directory`.

- `s3://bucket/path/within/bucket` for AWS S3

  The endpoint, appropriate credentials, and bucket region (for
  non-anonymous access) must be determined automatically.

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

- `s3+http:` and `s3+https:` for S3-compatible servers

  This URL syntax is AMBIGUOUSLY either:

  - `s3+https://endpoint/path/within/bucket`, assuming `endpoint`
    corresponds to a single bucket,
    e.g. `s3+https://mybucket.s3.amazonaws.com/bucket/path`, or;

  - `s3+https://endpoint/bucket/path/within/bucket`, assuming
    `endpoint` corresponds to multiple buckets,
    e.g. `s3+https://s3.amazonaws.com/bucket/path`.

  The appropriate credentials (and bucket region for non-anonymous
  access) must be determined automatically.

  For most operations, e.g. to GET a single object, this ambiguity
  does not matter, but for LIST operations the implementation must
  determine the path to the root of the bucket, e.g. by initially
  attempting the LIST operation with both possible paths and checking
  which one succeeds.  For subsequent operations on the same endpoint
  the result can be cached to avoid overhead.

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resource kind is known
  syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

  For the purpose of relative URLs, the path component includes the `bucket/`
  prefix even if the endpoint is in fact a multi-bucket endpoint.

- `gs://bucket/path/within/bucket` for Google Cloud Storage (GCS)

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

The following `adapter` URL schemes are defined:

- `zip:path/within/zip` for ZIP archive format

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource (which is expected to
  be in ZIP format).

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

- `ocdbt:` for [OCDBT](https://google.github.io/tensorstore/kvstore/ocdbt/index.html)

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource (which is expected
  to be in OCDBT format).

  The URL syntax is `ocdbt:path` or `ocdbt:@version/path`, where
  `version` is either `v123` or `2025-01-01T01:23:45.678Z`.

  For example:

  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:@v1/path/within/database`
  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:path/within/database`
  - `file:///tmp/dataset.ocdbt/|ocdbt:@2025-01-01T01:23:45.678Z/path/within/database`

  While `@` is normally allowed within the path component of a URL,
  with the `ocdbt:` URL scheme, if the path starts with `@` it must be
  percent-encoded as `%40` to avoid ambiguity with the `@version`
  component.  For example, a path of `@abc` can be specified as
  `ocdbt:%40abc`.

  The resultant resource kind may be either `file` or `directory`.

  For the purpose of relative URLs, the path component does not include the
  `@version/` prefix if present in the base URL.

- `icechunk:` for [Icechunk](https://icechunk.io/en/latest/)

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource (which is expected
  to contain an Icechunk database).

  The following syntaxes are supported:

  - `icechunk:` (equivalent to `icechunk:@branch.main/`, refers to the root of
    the main branch)
  - `icechunk:path/to/node/` (equivalent to `icechunk:@branch.main/path/to/node/`)
  - `icechunk:@branch.BRANCH/path/to/node/`
  - `icechunk:@tag.TAG/path/to/node/`
  - `icechunk:@SNAPSHOT/path/to/node/`

  References to a branch always refer to the latest commit.  Prior
  commits on a branch may be specified explicitly using the
  `@SNAPSHOT` syntax.

  For example:

  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:|zarr3:path/to/array/`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@branch.other/|zarr3:path/to/array/`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@tag.v5/|zarr3:path/to/array/`
  - `file:///path/to/repo.zarr.icechunk/|icechunk:@4N0217AZA4VNPYD0HR0G/|zarr3:path/to/array/`

  While `@` is normally allowed within the path component of a URL,
  with the `icechunk:` URL scheme, if the path starts with `@` it must
  be percent-encoded as `%40` to avoid ambiguity with the `@version`
  component.  For example, a path of `@abc/` can be specified as
  `icechunk:%40abc/`.

  If the path is empty or ends with `/`, the resultant resource kind
  is known syntatically to be a `directory`.

  Otherwise, the resultant resource kind may be either `file` or
  `directory`.

  For the purpose of relative URLs, the path component does not include the
  `@version/` prefix if present.

- `zarr3:path/within/hierarchy/` to specify a zarr v3 node

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource, which is expected
  to contain a zarr v3 hierarchy.

  The resultant resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `zarr2:path/within/hierarchy/` to specify a zarr v2 node

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource, which is expected
  to contain a zarr v2 hierarchy.

  The resultant resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `zarr:path/within/hierarchy/` to specify a zarr v2 or v3 node

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource, which is expected
  to contain a zarr v2/v3 hierarchy.

  The implementation must determine the zarr format version automatically.

  The resultant resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `n5:path/within/hierarchy` to specify an [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) group or array

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource, which is expected
  to contain an N5 hierarchy.

  Because N5 is defined to inherit attributes from ancestor groups in the
  hierarchy, it is recommended that the base URL refers to the root of the n5
  hierarchy, and any path within the hierarchy be specified through the `n5:`
  scheme.

  The resultant resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `gzip:`, `zstd:` for transparent access to compressed files

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to be in the
  format indicated by the URL scheme.

  Currently no path is supported.

  The resultant resource kind is always `file`.

  For example:

  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data.gz|gzip:`
  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data.zstd|zstd:`

- `byte-range:start-end` for specifying a byte range within a file

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to support
  byte range access.

  The `start` and `end` components of the URL specify byte offsets in base 10.
  The `start` bound is inclusive while the `end` bound is exclusive; the total
  length is `end - start`.

  The resultant resource kind is always `file`.

  For example:

  - `gs://bucket/path/to/data|byte-range:1000-2000`

- `tiff:`, `jpeg:`, `png:`, `bmp:`, `avif:`, `webp:`

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to
  contain an image in the format indicated by the URL scheme.

  Currently no path is supported.

  The resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `neuroglancer-precomputed:` for [Neuroglancer
  precomputed](https://neuroglancer-docs.web.app/datasource/precomputed/index.html)

  The base URL must refer to a `directory` resource, which is expected to
  contain a neuroglancer precomputed dataset.

  Currently no path component is allowed by the `neuroglancer-precomputed` URL
  scheme.

  The resource kind is always `dataset`.

- `json:path`

  The base URL must refer to a `file` resource, which is expected to
  contain an encoded JSON document.

  The `path` is in [JSON pointer
  syntax](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6901) and indicates
  a sub-value within the JSON document.  An empty path corresponds to
  the entire JSON document.

  The resource kind is always `dataset`, specifically a rank-0 array
  with data type `json`.

- `..:path/within/outer/sub-URL` and `..:/path/within/outer/sub-URL` may be used
  to traverse out from the prior adapter.

  This scheme is primarily useful within the relative URL pipeline syntax
  defined below.

  Any `..` adapters are resolved in order.  The presence of a `..` adapter
  causes the prior adapter to be discarded.  The path component is interpreted
  relative to the path of the sub-URL immediately prior to the discarded adapter
  sub-URL.

  It is an error if there are no remaining adapter sub-URLs when resolving the
  `..` adapter.

  For security, implementation SHOULD place limits on where this scheme is
  permitted.

If the adapter URL would otherwise consist of just the scheme followed by ":",
it is permitted to omit the final ":".  For example:

- `https://example.com/path/to/archive.zip|zip|zarr3` is equivalent to
  `https://example.com/path/to/archive.zip|zip:|zarr3:`.

It is expected that additional base and adapter URL schemes may be standardized
in the future.

#### Examples

Examples:

- `https://server.example.com:1234/path/to/array`

   Specifies a normal HTTPS URL.

- `s3://bucket/path/to/file`

   Specifies:
   - within the AWS S3 bucket named `bucket`,
   - the path `path/to/file`.

- `gs://bucket/path/to/outer.zip|zip:path/to/inner.zip|zip:path/to/zarr/hierarchy|zarr3:path/to/array`

  Specifies:
  - within the GCS bucket named `bucket`,
  - within the ZIP file at the path `path/to/outer.zip`,
  - within the ZIP file at the path `path/to/inner.zip`,
  - within the Zarr v3 hierarchy at the path `path/to/zarr/hierarchy/`,
  - the Zarr v3 node at the path `path/to/array/`.

- `gs://bucket/path/to/outer.zip|zip:path/to/inner.zip|..:other/zarr/hierarchy|zarr3:path/to/array`

  Normalizes to:

  `gs://bucket/path/to/other/zarr/hierarchy/|zarr3:path/to/array`

### Format auto-detection

Implementations MAY support format auto-detection for certain `adapter` URL
schemes.

For a given base URL specifying a `file` or `directory` resource, the
implementation determines a set of matching `adapter` URLs:

- For a base `file` resource, this is typically done by reading a prefix and/or
  suffix of the file in order to match expected signatures;

- For a base `directory` resource, this is typically done by checking for the
  presence of certain files.

Given a base URL specifying a `file` or `directory` resource, to obtain a
`dataset` resource using format auto-detection, the implementation:

1. Determines the set of matching `adapter` URLs for the current base URL.  If
   there is exactly one match, add the matching adapter to the current base URL
   to obtain a new base URL.  Otherwise, return an error.

2. If the new base URL is a `dataset` resource, return the new base URL as the
   successful format auto-detection result.  Otherwise, continue back at step 1
   with the new base URL as the current base URL.

### Context-dependent URL pipeline interpretation

Implementations MAY interpret URL pipelines in a context-dependent way.  For
example, consider the following hypothetical APIs (which may not all be part of
the same software):

- `open_array`: opens an arbitrary array from a URL

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` or `directory` resource, performs
  format auto-detection to obtain a `dataset` resource.

  If format auto-detection fails or the resultant `dataset` resource is not an
  array, fails with an error.

  Otherwise, opens the resolved URL as an array.

- `open_zarr_array`: opens a zarr array from a URL with format auto-detection

  Same as `open_array`, except that if the resolved `dataset` resource is not a
  zarr array, fails.

- `open_zarr_array_without_auto_detection`: opens a zarr array without format
  auto-detection

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` resource, fails with an error.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `directory` resource, append the `zarr:`
  adapter and open it.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `dataset` resource, open it and fail if it
  is not in zarr format.

- `open_kvstore`: opens a key-value store file or directory from a URL

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` or `directory` resource, opens it.

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `dataset` resource, returns an error.

- `open_file`: opens a file from a URL

  If passed a URL that resolves to a `file` resource, opens it.

  Otherwise, returns an error.

### Relative URL pipeline syntax

Relative URL pipelines permit the locations of resources to be specified
relative to some base URL pipeline that is specified separately, potentially
traversing through one or more layers of adapter.

For example:

- A zarr attribute may be defined that specifies the location of some other
  related array using the relative URL pipeline syntax.

- The referencing array may be located at
  `s3://bucket/path/to/dataset.zip|zip:path/within/zip/|zarr3:`.  Using only a
  relative path, it could specify the path of another array within
  `s3://bucket/path/to/dataset.zip|zip:`, e.g. the relative path
  `../another/array/` would refer to
  `s3://bucket/path/to/dataset.zip|zip:path/another/array/`.  To refer to
  `s3://bucket/path/of/another.zip|zip:other/array/`, the relative URL
  pipeline `..:../of/another.zip|zip:other/array/|zarr3:` can be used.

The relative URL pipeline syntax has the following ABNF grammar:

```
relative_url_pipeline = ( absolute_path / relative_path ) *( "|" adapter )
                      / absolute_url_pipeline
```

A relative zarr URL is always resolved relative to a specified base URL
pipeline.  An `absolute_path` starts with a `/`, while a `relative_path` does
not.  The initial `absolute_path` or `relative_path` applies to the path
component of the inner-most (last) sub-URL.  If the `relative_path` is the empty
string, the path component of the inner-most sub-URL remains unchanged.  After
applying the `absolute_path` or `relative_path` to the existing absolute URL,
any specified adapter sub-URLs are appended.

Note: An `absolute_path` overrides any existing *path* component of the
inner-most sub-URL of the base, but is still relative to the scheme and other
components of the inner-most sub-URL of the base URL pipeline that precede its
path component, if any.  The specific scheme of the sub-URL defines what
portion, if any, constitutes the path component.

As with regular URL syntax, it is not permitted for the first component of
`relative_path` to contain a colon (`:`), e.g. `a:b`, since that would be
ambiguous with specifying the base URL scheme for an absolute URL.  Instead,
such a relative URL must be prefixed with `./`, e.g. `./a:b`.

#### Examples

- - Base URL: `gs://bucket/path/to/`
  - Relative URL: `file.zip|zip:path/within/zip`
  - Resolved URL: `gs://bucket/path/to/file.zip|zip:path/within/zip`

- - Base URL: `gs://bucket/path/to/`
  - Relative URL: `/file.zip|zip:path/within/zip`
  - Resolved URL: `gs://bucket/file.zip|zip:path/within/zip`

- - Base URL: `gs://bucket/path/to/file.zip|zip:path/within/zip`
  - Relative URL: `..:/path/to/other.zip|zip:path/in/other/zip`
  - Resolved URL: `gs://bucket/path/to/other.zip|zip:path/in/other/zip`

## Rationale

This proposal takes into account several key considerations:

- The URL syntax must support specifying:
  - The underlying key-value store;
  - The path within the key-value store of the root Zarr node;
  - Optionally, a path within the Zarr hierachy starting from the root Zarr
    node.  Note: Currently, as no storage transformers have been defined, the
    path to any Zarr node may be specified directly as a path within the
    underlying key-value store, making this additional path unneccessary.
- Must support nested key-values stores, like one or more layers of a ZIP
  archive within some other key-value store.
- The URL syntax must be compatible with interactive completion as the user
  types.
- The URL syntax must also be extensible for use with non-zarr formats.

The use of outer-to-inner order for the sub-URLs enables completion of both
paths and sub-URL schemes as the user types.

The sub-URL delimiter of `|` was chosen because it is not a valid URL character,
and therefore does not have any existing valid interpretation within URLs, and
also is evocative of POSIX shell pipe syntax.

## Implementations

- TensorStore (https://google.github.io/tensorstore/spec.html#json-TensorStoreUrl)

  Format auto-detection is also implemented.

  The `relative_url_pipeline` syntax is not supported.

- Neuroglancer (https://neuroglancer-docs.web.app/datasource/index.html#url-syntax)

  The `http:` and `https:` schemes automatically detect and support
  HTML and S3-compatible directory listing.

  Format auto-detection is also implemented.

  The `relative_url_pipeline` syntax is not supported.

- zarr-python (https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/pull/3369)

  The `relative_url_pipeline` syntax is not supported.

## Related Work

### fsspec

The [fsspec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) library is
widely used with the zarr-python library to access a variety of storage systems,
and includes support for ZIP files and other nested stores.

Like this proposal, the fsspec URL syntax consists of a sequence of sub-URLs
separated by a delimiter, but differs as follows:

- fsspec uses a delimiter of `::` rather than `|` as used in this proposal.
- fsspec orders sub-URLs from innermost to outermost, which is the opposite
  order from what is proposed here.

The use of `::` as a delimiter of the sub-URLs means that fsspec URLs may
conform to the syntax of a normal URL, because `::` is permitted within the
path, query, and fragment components of a URL.  This has both advantages and
disadvantages:

- An fsspec URL may be accepted by existing URL parsers/matchers not
  specifically designed for fsspec.
- Because the interpretation of the `::` delimiter within an fsspec URL differs from
  the normal interpretation within a URL, operations such as relative path
  resolution designed to operate on URLs generically may execute without errors
  on an fsspec URL but produce an incorrect result.  In contrast, the use of `|`
  within this proposal ensures that the resultant syntax will not be confused
  with a valid regular URL, because `|` is not a permitted character within
  URLs.

The outer-to-inner order of sub-URLs in the fsspec URL syntax is not compatible
with the usual operation of text completion as the user types.  It is also
opposite to the outer-to-inner order used for specifying paths within URLs.

### Apache Commons VFS

The [Apache Commons VFS](https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-vfs/) is a
Java library that provides capabilities similar to those of the fsspec Python
library.

The Apache Commons VFS URL syntax specifies the base scheme and all of the
sub-schemes, in inner to outer order, delimited by `:`, followed by the paths
for each scheme, in outer-to-inner order, delimited by `!`.

For example:

- `gz:tar:file:///extra/data/tryVfs/archive.tar!/tardir/content.txt.gz!content.txt`,
  which under this proposal would be
  `file:///extra/data/tryVfs/archive.tar|tar:tardir/content.txt.gz|gz` (assuming
  the existence of `tar` and `gz` adapter schemes).

As with the fsspec syntax, this URL syntax conforms to the standard URL syntax
but has a different interpretation, which has both advantages and disadvantages.

Separating the adapter scheme from the adapter path makes the association of
adapter and path less obvious, particularly if there is more than one adapter.

While the outer-to-inner order of the nested paths makes text completion of the
paths feasible, the URL syntax is not readily compatible with completion of the
nested schemes.

### GDAL Virtual File Systems

https://gdal.org/user/virtual_file_systems.html

This uses a path syntax rather than a URL syntax.  It supports chaining but
makes assumptions about paths (e.g. that a zip file always ends with .zip).

For example:

- `/vsizip//vsicurl/ftp://user:password@example.com/foldername/file.zip/example.shp`,
  which under this proposal would be
  `ftp://user:password@example.com/foldername/file.zip|zip:example.shp`.

## Backward Compatibility

If Zarr implementations wish to add support for this proposed URL syntax to an
existing generic "open" interface that already supports other syntax, such as a
plain non-absolute file path or the fsspec URL syntax, there are potential
ambiguities:

- A relative file path such as `file:/abc` can also be interpreted as a URL.
  Presumably implementations would disambiguate this as a URL, which may (in
  rare cases) change the behavior of existing code.
- A nested fsspec URL is unlikely to be a valid URL under this proposal, but a
  non-nested fsspec URL may well be a valid URL under this proposal.  In many
  cases the interpretation will also be the same, but in some cases it may be
  subtly different.

## Discussion

None yet.

## Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
