---
layout: default
title: ZEP0009
description: This ZEP proposes a reworking of the Zarr v3 extension naming mechanism.
parent: draft ZEPs
nav_order: 9
---

# ZEP 9 — Zarr Extension Naming

Authors:

- Norman Rzepka
- Josh Moore

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2025-01-21

## Abstract

The Zarr v3 specification is unclear on several matters regarding the
definition of extensions in the `zarr.json` metadata. This proposal defines
immediate clarifications for the specification which will allow the centralized
creation of "raw" names as well as the decentralized use of URIs for
extensions. At the same time, we propose a longer-term strategy for evolving
extensions and extension points for discussion and potential approval by the
community to be rolled out to implementations at a future time.

## Introduction

The intention of the Zarr v3 spec was to provide a framework where
community-driven extensions can be created and managed by the community itself.
However, the process for that was unclear and, therefore, implicitly linked to
the ZEP process. Issues have been surfaced by users, who wanted to create and
use new extensions. For example, users wanted to
[create new codecs](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/256),
[data types](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/257) and
[an extension for consolidated metadata](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/309).
We thank the members of the community for their efforts in discovering and communicating
these issues.

The underlying problem is that the extension mechanism for v3 lacks detail in
its definition. While several extension points are defined in the core spec,
there is no advice about selecting names for these extensions or how naming
conflicts are avoided. Additionally, there is no mechanism for defining new
extensions that do not fit into the existing extension points. In fact, there
are contradictions in what is entirely permissible, including for example
whether codecs are within or required by the core v3 spec.

Implementations have started to use the v3 spec and are making use of
extensions (e.g `numcodecs.*` codecs and `zstd` in zarr-python), which means
that any changes made to the v3 spec need to be compatible with the current
reality in the community.

## Proposal

This proposal has three phases.

The [first phase](#Phase-1-Immediate-clarifications) clarifies that extensions
can be created by the community without the ZEP process. Extensions with
URI-based names can be created without any further coordination and extensions
with raw names only need to get the name registered in the `zarr-developers`
Github organization. The process for registering will be a lightweight PR-based
process.

The naming mechanism as well as clarifications in the core spec documented will
be implemented by the ZSC through a PR against the zarr-specs repository for
discussion concurrently with this ZEP. The changes we are proposing, marked
with a "🛠️" below, are interpretations of the current Zarr v3 core spec as well
as additions that are in-line with the spec evolution policy of the Zarr core
spec. The Zarr core spec document will be bumped to version 3.1. The metadata
in the `zarr.json` files will remain unchanged `zarr_format=3`.

The [second phase](#Phase-2-New-extension-points) defines new extension points
and therefore will follow the active ZEP process. The goal is to encourage more
exploration by the Zarr community outside of what's currently defined with the
core specification.

The [third phase](#Phase-3-Future-name-evolution) defines a possible future
evolution of the naming strategy, largely as a justification for decisions made
in the first two phases. It is non-normative and can be further discussed in
future ZEPs.

Revisions to ZEP 0 will be paused until we are clear about the extension
mechanism and the implications for the role of the ZEP process in the future.
The ZEP process remains in place for changes to the Zarr v3 core spec including
the adoption of extensions into the core spec.

## Definitions

- "Core" refers to the Zarr v3 core specification as defined in the document
  https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html and not
  necessarily if something is a MUST for implementations.
- "Metadata" is the Zarr metadata as stored in `zarr.json` files for arrays and
  groups.
- "Extensions" as used in this document are components used in the metadata to
  define and configure how metadata are interpreted by implementations. These
  components include codecs, data types, chunk key encodings, chunk grids and
  storage transformers.
- "Extension points" are locations within metadata where extension-related
  metadata can be found. Current extension points are listed in the core spec,
  e.g. `codecs`, `data_type`. As part of this proposal, we intend to add another
  general-purpose extension point called [`extensions`](#Extension-points).
- "Extension maintainers" are a person or a team that is responsible for
  creating and maintaining an extension.## Rollout and next steps

## Phase 1: Immediate clarifications

### Extension naming

🛠️ We propose defining two categories of names for immediate use by extensions:
raw names and URI-based.

1. **Raw names** MUST be assigned within a central repository and follow the
   compatibility and versioning [v3 stability
   policy](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#stability-policy).
   The name assignment is managed through the [`zarr-developers` Github
   organization](https://github.com/zarr-developers), where each extension is
   listed and either contains a spec document or links to a spec document.
   Names are never unassigned or reassigned. The ZSC or by delegation a
   maintainer team reserves the right to refuse name assignment at its own
   discretion.

   - **Example:** `zstd`
   - **Acceptd regex:** `^[a-z0-9-_.]+$`

2. **URI-based names** can be used by anyone without further coordination
   though the assumption is that users reasonably "own" the URI.
   URIs have been chosen due to their potential for being self-documenting and
   *strong recommend* that the URL SHOULD resolve to a human-readable explanation of the extension, but
   implementations SHOULD NOT attempt to resolve the URL during processing.
   There are no guarantees in terms of versioning or compatibility. However,
   preserving backwards-compatibility is strongly encouraged. See the
   [versioning section](#Versioning-and-spec-evolution) below.

   - **Example:** `https://example.com/zarr3/consolidated-metadata`
   - **Accepted regex:** `^https?:\/\/[^/?#]+[^?#]*$`


All names currently listed in the v3 specification are raw names. URIs were
mentioned in previous drafts of the v3 specification and are still referenced
under the codecs section:

> "Each codec must be defined via a separate specification. In order to refer
> to codecs in array metadata documents, each codec must have a unique
> identifier, which is a URI that dereferences to a human-readable
> specification of the codec."
> (https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#specifying-codecs).

🛠️ This proposal would drop the MUST requirement on the dereferencing of the
URI to a SHOULD and more widely specify that implemenations MAY use URI-based
key names throughout the specification. (See
[community registry](#Community-registry) below for a proposal on coordinating the use of
URIs.)

### Extension definitions

Extensions are defined in the `zarr.json` metadata either as objects or as
short-hand names.

🛠️ In order to unify the general design of future extensions we would add a
MUST requirement for future extension objects to adhere to the following
definition.

Objects have the following keys:
```json
{
    "name": "<name>",
    "configuration": { ... } # optional
}
```

If such an object is present, the field `must_understand` is implicitly set to
`True` and an object can explicitly set `must_understand=False` if
implementations can ignore its presence, following the current guidelines in
the v3 specification.

Instead of extension objects, short-hand names may continue to be used if no
configuration metadata is required. They would be equivalent to extension
objects with just a `name` key. This is in-line with
[the current wording of the spec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#id11).

### Extension specifications

There is no strict requirement for extensions to have a formal specification.
However, for adoption in the community it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED to write a
specification.

For extensions with raw names, there will be a repository under the
`zarr-developers` Github organization to either publish the specifications
directly or link to another location. For extensions with URI-based names, it
is RECOMMENDED to publish the specification under the URI of the extension.

### Extension points

The v3 core spec defines a number of extension points for arrays and groups
that can hold extensions following the above recommendations:

- `data_type` (array only)
- `codecs` (array only)
- `chunk_grids` (array only)
- `chunk_key_encoding` (array only)
- `storage_transformers` (array only) // extendable to groups

The Zarr v3 core spec was originally designed to not contain any extensions,
such as data types, codecs etc. However, over time and through changing
authorship, some extensions were, in fact, listed in
[the core spec document](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#data-types).

🛠️ We propose to acknowledge that the Zarr v3 core spec includes a few
extensions that are expected to be supported by all implementations and fix the
wording in the core spec document accordingly. Wording in each section will be
updated to clarify whether or not an implementation `MUST` support the
extension point. Other extensions become "core" by being listed in the core
spec document through a ZEP. The use of a "raw name" does **NOT** automatically
make an extension "core".

The following extensions are (currently) listed or referred to in the core spec
and would be declared as "core" extensions under this proposal.

 * Data types: `(u)int{8,16,32,64}`, `float{32,64}`, `complex{64,128}`, `r*`
 * Codecs: `bytes`, `transpose`
 * Chunk grids: `regular`
 * Chunk key encoding: `default`, `v2`
 * Storage transformers: (none)


 ### Example

The following example represents an Array showing many of the proposed changes
described above:

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "data_type": "https://example.com/zarr/string", // URI-based name, short-hand name
    "chunk_key_encoding": {
        "name": "default", // core
        "configuration": { "separator": "." }
    },
    "codecs": [
        {
            "name": "https://numcodecs.dev/vlen-utf8" // URI-based name
        },
        {
            "name": "zstd", // raw name
            "configuration": { ... }
        }
    ],
    "chunk_grid": {
        "name": "regular", // core
        "configuration": { "chunk_shape": [ 32 ] }
    },
    "shape": [ 128 ],
    "dimension_names": [ "x" ],
    "attributes": { ... },
    "storage_transformers": []
}

```

### Discussion

#### Community registry

Externally to this ZEP, we will work towards unification of these extension
points. We propose that community register and discuss their extensions on an
additional repository within the zarr-developers organization. We recommend
that a maturity ranking be included in those listings as in other plugin
ecosystems.

#### Reassigning or unassigning names

We consider it a design goal to not allow datasets written with one set of
naming expectations to be unintentionally interpreted with *other* names by a
future version of an implementation. Without further mechanics, this means that
raw and URI-based names, once assigned, cannot be changed. (For a possible
evolution of this naming scheme, see [phase 3](#Phase-3-name-evolution) below.)
With this limitation, current implementations either already or quickly can be
updated to support the above proposal since no additional logic is necessary
beyond checking `must_understand`.

#### Name assignment

Raw names will be assigned through the `zarr-developers` Github organization.

Our first choice would be to have a single, additional repository which can be
maintained by a large number of contributors. This will simplify review and
prevent long-wait times on assginment. The process for updating the
`zarr-specs` repository with these names, if at all, needs to be defined.

An alternative would be to use the `zarr-specs` repository to deposit spec
documents for every assigned name. The process would be that extension
maintainers would open a PR (with a template) to register their desired name.
Extension maintainers could choose to publish their extensions spec in the
repository directly or link to an externally hosted spec. Updates of specs
hosted in `zarr-specs`, would be updated through PRs. A zarr-specs maintainer
team would be required to ensure a timely assignment of names and updates to
the specs.

A third option would be to only store the names of the extensions in
`zarr-specs` repository and always link out to an externally hosted spec. In
that case, externally hosted could also be another repo under `zarr-developers`
that manages some extensions through its own maintenance structure.

## Phase 2: New extension points

Beyond the immediate clarifications that are outlined in phase 1, we believe
that additional extension points will further improve the Zarr v3
specification. Since these introduce new interfaces that implementations SHOULD
be aware, we discuss them here for consideration as a ZEP.

#### Using `must_understand`

The v3 core spec allows for the addition of new metadata keys as part of spec
evolution. This is defined in the
["Extension Points" section](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#extension-points)
of the core spec. Currently, implementations MUST parse the entire metadata and
fail, if they find keys they cannot parse unless those are marked by
`must_understand=False`. We propose using this mechanism to evolve the spec and
add the keys that are necessary to achieve a well-defined extension mechanism.

New keys in the metadata MAY contain objects that have a `must_understand` key
with value `false`. In that case, the key may be ignored by implementations
that cannot parse it. This is useful for extensions that aren't strictly
required for interaction with the data. If the new key holds a scalar value or
an array or doesn't not contain the `must_understand` key, it is implictily
`must_understand=True`. In that case, implementations MUST fail if they cannot
parse the key.

### "extensions" extension point

🛠️  To provide for more flexible, immediate, and de-centralized use cases, we
propose to also add another general-purpose extension point `extensions` on
both arrays and groups into which extensions MAY be added.

The `extensions` object holds an array of extension definitions. The held array
MUST either have one or more extensions or the object MUST be omitted entirely.

The key itself is implicitly `must_understand=True`. Implementations MAY set
`must_understand=False` if they can reliably determine that all extensions are
also `must_understand=False`.

### Additional extension points

We support the creation of additional extension points in the future but their
introduction should follow the ZEP process. In general, the overall number of
"core" extension points should be well-maintained and provide clear APIs which
can be implemented by a large number of libraries. ZEPs are the appropriate
mechanism to encourage a wide variety of opinions and consensus building.

### Versioning and spec evolution

We propose leaving the versioning of the core spec unchanged. That means the
value of `zarr_format=3` and new keys to the metadata MUST be understood by
implementations, i.e. they MUST fail if they find a key they don't know, and
all changes to the core spec MUST go through the ZEP process.

Extensions SHOULD follow the
[stability policy defined in the Zarr v3 core spec](https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/v3/core/v3.0.html#stability-policy).
However, this is not a strict requirement and extension maintainers can define
their own evolution processes.

It is recommended that extensions evolve in a backwards-compatible manner
without explicitly stored versions, meaning (credit to Jeremy Maitin-Shepard):

- Any metadata compatible with a previous version of the extension continues to
  be correctly interpreted by implementations of the new version.
- New metadata written according to the new version of the extension either:
  (a) is correctly interpreted by existing implementations of previous versions of the extension, or
  (b) causes existing implementations of previous versions of the extension to report an error and not load it.
- New metadata written according to the new version of the extension MUST not
  be successfully loaded by existing implementations of previous versions of
  the extension with an incorrect interpretation.

While it is recommended to maximize backwards-compatible changes, it is also
possible to evolve the extension in an intentionally backwards-incompatible
way, e.g.:

- Choose a new name, e.g. append a version number to the existing name.
- Add a new key to the configuration (like `version`) that was disallowed by
  the previous version of the extension, such that existing implementations
  will fail when they encounter it.

### Example

The following example represents an Array showing many of the proposed changes
described above:

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...,
    "extensions": [ // new general-purpose extension point
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/offset", // uri-based name
            "configuration": { "offset": [ 12 ] }
        },
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/array-statistics", // uri-based name
            "configuration": {
                "min": 5,
                "max": 12
            },
            "must_understand": false // optional extension
        },
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/consolidated-metadata", // uri-based name
            "configuration": { ... }
            "must_understand": false // optional extension
        }
    ],
}

```

### Discussion

#### Alternatives for the `extensions` extension point

This proposal contains a new general-purpose extension point `extensions`,
which holds an array of extensions. This design allows to have the same
extension definition syntax across all extension points. It also avoids using
URIs as keys in JSON metadata and reduces pollution of the top-level namespace
in a `zarr.json`. Thus, the addition of top-level metadata keys remains
reserved to changes in the core spec. This MAY happen as part of the core spec
adopting functionality of an extension.

There are alternative designs to be considered:

##### Top-level metadata keys

Instead of a general-purpose extension point, we could also add new top-level
extension keys to the metadata.

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...
    "https://example.com/zarr/offset": { "offset": [ 12 ] },
    "https://example.com/zarr/array-statistics": {
        "min": 5,
        "max": 12
    },
    "https://example.com/zarr/consolidated-metadata": {
        "must_understand": false,
        ...
    }, // optional extension
    ...
}
```

In this case, there would be no explicit `configuration` key within an
extension definition, but instead all the keys of such a configuration would be
in the object itself. This would mean that there are two separate types of
extension definitions, i.e. `{"name":"<name>", "configuration": {...}}` in
specialized extension points (e.g. `codecs`) and `"<name>": {...}` for other
extensions.

It would still be recommended to use an object with keys for the extension
definition to allow for evolution of the extension.

In case an extension becomes adopted into the core spec, implementations
wouldn't need to be changed (only when changing the name from URI-based to raw
name).

There has been some controversy about using URLs as keys in JSON metadata.
However, it has also been used effectively in formats such as JSON-LD (see
below).

##### `extensions` object

Instead of an array that holds the extension definitions, we could also use an object.

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...
    "extensions": {
        "https://example.com/zarr/offset": { "offset": [ 12 ] },
        "https://example.com/zarr/array-statistics": {
            "min": 5,
            "max": 12
        },
        "https://example.com/zarr/consolidated-metadata": {
            "must_understand": false,
            ...
        } // optional extension
    },
    ...
}
```

This alternative is similar to the top-level keys, with mostly the same implications.

However, this alternative would reserve the top-level namespace for changes to
the core spec and, therefore, reduce pollution of the top-level namespace.


#### Applicaton to subnodes

Conceptually, we propose that extensions defined on groups should be valid for
their child nodes. However, the details of how an implementation should
identify which extensions are active within an hierarchy are unclear. Relying
on traversing the hierarchy towards the root node is undesirable from a
performance point of view. By writing *some* metadata within the contained
subgroups and arrays this could be made easier. Options for what this metadata
could be include:

1. A copy of the metadata

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "https://example.com/my-extension",
      "configuration": { ... full copy of the metadata ...}
    }
  ]

}
```

2. A reference to the metadata as part of the extension itself

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "https://example.com/my-extension",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]

}
```

3. A complimentary reference extension

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "https://example.com/my-extension-ref",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]

}
```

4. A shared or even core reference extension

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "https://zarr.dev/extensions/parent-ref",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Phase 3: Future name evolution

The phase 1 proposal above prioritizes changes that can be made to the
specification in line with the current text, aware that there are
contradictions and a lack of clarity.

It does not provide, however, a mechanism for evolving the assigned names.

An extension that begins life as a URI that eventually migrates to having a raw
name will require implementations to be updated to check for both values.

This section outlines why choices above were made (e.g., use of full URIs
rather than a shorter alternative) as the basis for a possible pathway to
evolving the naming strategy. These changes **would** require updating
implementations and therefore would require an additional ZEP but would be
backwards compatible with the clarifications above.

### URIs everywhere

By having a mechanism which maps all extension names to a global URI, the two
names (URI and raw) associated with an extensinon. In fact, the original name
assigned to the extension becomes its permanent internal representation even if
it can later be referred to by a shorter name.

To demonstrate, under this representation the example above could be made
equivalent to:

```javascript
{
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/array/data_type": "https://example.com/zarr/string",
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/array/chunk_key_encoding": {
        "name": "https://zarr.dev/v3/chunk_key_encodings/default",
    },
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/array/codecs": [
        {
            "name": "https://numcodecs.dev/vlen-utf8"
        },
        {
            "name": "https://zarr.dev/v3/codecs/zstd",
        }
    ],
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/array/chunk_grid": {
        "name": "https://zarr.dev/v3/chunk_grid/regular",
    },
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/extensions":
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/offset",
        },
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/array-statistics",
        },
        {
            "name": "https://example.com/zarr/consolidated-metadata",
        }
    },
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/array/dimension_names": [ "x" ],
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/attributes": { ... },
    "https://zarr.dev/v3/storage_transformers": []
}
```

where all identifiers are now prefixed with a URI full scoping the value,
prefixed in this example with `https://zarr.dev/v3/`. The
specification would clearly list which prefix applies to all "raw" names within
the specification and any new "raw" names which are brought into the
specification **might** exist within URIs outside of `https://zarr.dev/` .

### Implicit Naming Context

For all intents and purposes, the immediate proposal defined in this document
defines a single, unversioned global naming context owned by the Zarr
organization which can provide such a mapping. This can be seen as a JSON
document of the form:

```
"@context": {
  "bool": "https://zarr.dev/bool",  // used for brevity and doesn't represent the final URI
   ...etc...
}

```
This context is not written into each Zarr document but is implied.

### Explicit Naming Context

Through the ZEP process, we could make it possible to define an **explicit**
context within a zarr.json file which would override the default, unchaning
naming context. This would let us in the future slowly correct raw names as
necessary without a full breaking change to the format.

```
"@context": "https://zarr.dev/context/v3.1"
```

This explicit context reference would be written in the zarr.json itself.


### Relationship with JSON-LD

Readers familiar with [JSON-LD](https://json-ld.org/) will recognize the
"@context" definition:

- Each JSON-LD file MAY have a "@context" key which defines how name resolution
  works. With that it's possible to either load a remote context field, or
  define namespaces and fields inline. (For Zarr naming resolution, we would
  likely want to avoid loading remote resources in favor of well-known contexts
  which are cached within the implementations.)
- All keys within the JSON-LD are then resolved against this context.
  *EVERYTHING* is a URI but can alternatively be referred to as
  "https://example.com/field", "example:field" or for the default namespace
  "field"


#### Prefixes and aliases

As an existing and well-defined resolution process, other features of the
JSON-LD naming mechanism might be worth considering for future adoption. For
example, prefixes can be defined within the context, whether implicit or
explicit, which prevents the need to use the full URI. For example, with the
context:

```javascript
"@context": {
  "example": "https://example.com/some-prefix/",
```

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "data_type": "https://example.com/some-prefix/utf-16-string",
```
becomes:
```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "data_type": "example:utf-16-string",
```

A more advanced feature might be to introduce a short name inline with an
explicit context such that all uses of a given string can be replaced:


```
"@context": {
  "shrt": "https://example.com/some-prefix/long-name",
},
...
"shrt": values
...
```

### Internal implications

Under the hood, all name resolutions whether via implicit, explicit, or inline
context would convert identifer names to a URI which implementations could
reliably use for determining support. Once a URI is assigned, however, it
should never be changed.


## Copyright

This proposal is licensed under [the Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
