---
layout: default
title: ZEP010
description: This ZEP proposes a new generic extensions field.
parent: draft ZEPs
nav_order: 10
---

# ZEP 10 — Zarr Generic Extensions

Authors:

- [Norman Rzepka](https://github.com/normanrz), scalable minds
- [Josh Moore](https://github.com/joshmoore), German BioImaging

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2025-05-12

## Abstract

This proposal defines a new generic extension point, ``extensions``, to be
included in the metadata of Zarr v3 arrays and groups. The ``extensions`` field
provides a consistent mechanism for attaching additional metadata that does not
fit into existing extension points defined by the core specification. Extension
entries within this field follow the naming and structure rules established in
ZEP0009. This mechanism enables third parties to define and share metadata
extensions without requiring changes to the core specification or introducing
new top-level keys.

## Introduction

Zarr specification version 3 currently defines four extension points, each
associated with a specific (array) metadata field. Additional extension points
may be added by future ZEPs. Until that time, however, third-parties may want
to add arbitrary extension objects to either arrays or groups. This proposal
introduces a generic ``extensions`` field that serves as a container for such a
list of extensions.

These general purpose extensions are not limited by the scopes of existing
extension points and require no heavy-weight process to add functionality or alter
behavior of arrays and groups.
The intent is to facilitate decentralized and low-friction
innovation within the Zarr ecosystem by enabling third parties to experiment
with new features without requiring immediate changes
to the core specification.
By tolerating a broader range of experimental extensions, the community can
explore diverse use cases and patterns. Over time, widely adopted extensions
may serve as the foundation for future standardization through new ZEPS which
introduce new extension points or even core features.

## Proposal

To provide for more flexible, immediate, and de-centralized use cases, we
propose to add a generic extension point ``extensions`` on
both arrays and groups into which extensions MAY be added.

The ``extensions`` field if present MUST contain an array of extension
definitions. The contained array MUST either have one or more extensions or the
object MUST be omitted entirely.

Further details on the specification changes can be found in
<https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/344>.

### Definition and naming

Each extension object will follow the rules laid out in the "Zarr extensions"
section of the v3 specification.

### Processing

Zarr implementers
are expected to inspect the extensions for each node and determine whether each listed
extension is supported. If an extension includes ``"must_understand": true``
(the default) and the implementation does not support it, the node must not
be loaded and an appropriate error should be raised. For extensions with
``"must_understand": false``, implementers may safely ignore unrecognized entries.

To support a given extension, an implementation many hard-code a check for known
extension names and invoke appropriate logic according to the extension’s
specification at the correct point in its processing pipeline (e.g., during
metadata interpretation, data access, or layout resolution).
Where possible, however, implementations are encouraged, to delegate
that logic via a callback or plugin mechanism that allows third-party code to
handle the extension dynamically.

As the set of extensions evolves, certain interfaces may arise which allow
this modular approach for a subset of extensions. Where possible, these
interfaces will be added to the specification. Feedback from implementers
on such matters is highly encouraged.

### Examples

The following examples represent a few realistic use cases of the top-level
``extensions`` container. This ZEP is putting in place the mechanism so the
community can experiment with such extensions before their standardization.

#### Offset (array)

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "node_type": "array",
    ...,
    "extensions": [
        {
            "name": "example.offset",
            "configuration": { "offset": [ 12, 24 ] }
        }
    ]
}
```

The ``example.offset`` extension contains an array of the same order as the
shape of the containing array specifying which element of the array should be
considered as the origin, e.g., `[0, 0]`. This allows the reuse of subregions
of an array without the need to rewrite the data.

Note that in this example of the extension is ``must_understand=true`` meaning
an implementation which does not support the ``example.offset`` extension
should raise an error.

#### Statistics (array)

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "node_type": "array",
    ...,
    "extensions": [
        {
            "name": "example.array-statistics",
            "must_understand": false,
            "configuration": {
                "min": 5,
                "max": 1023
            }
        }
    ]
}
```

The ``example.array-statistics`` extension contains two fields -- ``min``
and ``max`` specifying the range of values which are present in the array,
reducing the need to read every byte. ``must_understand`` is false, so
implementations can safely ignore the extension.

#### Skip empty chunks (array)

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...,
    "extensions": [
        "example.skip_empty_chunks"
    ]
}
```

Currently the "write_empty_chunks" flag in zarr-python is not propagated
to the zarr.json file. An extension like ``example.skip_empty_chunks``
could serve as a no-configuration flag in the metadata to inform
implementations that empty chunks should not be written.



#### Multiscale arrays (group)

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "node_type": "group",
    ...,
    "extensions": [
        {
            "name": "example.multiscale-arrays",
            "must_understand": false,
            "configuration": {
                "multiscale": {
                    "datasets": [
                        "path/to/array/1",
                        "path/to/array/2",
                        "path/to/array/3"
                    ]
                }
            }
        }
    ],
}
```

Metadata is introduced in the ``example.multiscale-arrays``
extension which allows encoding a relationship between multiple arrays at the
group level. This defines a "multiscale pyramid" of arrays which is
a common idiom in both the geospatial and bioimaging uses of Zarr.
Implementations may choose to return a different subclass or backend when
detecting such metadata. In this case, a "datatree" which allows similar
operations on all levels of the pyramid might be preferred.

Conceptually, the extensions space is intended primarily for use by software
and automated processes, with the potential to influence behavior or processing
logic, whereas attributes are generally intended for human interpretation and
serve as passive metadata or provenance information. The boundary, however, is
not always clear.
Specifying this metadata as an extension as opposed to a
user-attribute allows the clear registration of the extension name, providing a
namespace for the metadata to prevent collisions.

#### Tiered storage (group)

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    "node_type": "group",
    ...,
    "extensions": [
        {
            "name": "example.tiered-storage",
            "must_understand": false,
            "configuration": {
                "slow-arrays": [
                    "path/to/array/1"
                ]
            }
        }
    ],
}
```

Related to the multiscales example above, an ``example.tiered-storage``
extension could identify arrays within a group which have been put on
slower or even archived filesystems which will encourage more overhead
and potentially costs if they are accessed. An implementation might
warn users before opening the array.

### Application to sub-nodes

This ZEP does not try to define the behavior for application to sub-nodes
itself, but defers this to actual extensions.

Conceptually, we propose that extensions defined on groups may be valid for
their child nodes. However, the details of how an implementation should
identify which extensions are active within an hierarchy are unclear. Relying
on traversing the hierarchy towards the root node is undesirable from a
performance point of view.

As a workaround, extension authors can choose to write *some* metadata within
the contained subgroups and arrays to make this easier. Options for what
this metadata could be include:

1. A copy of the metadata

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "example.my-extension",
      "configuration": { ... full copy of the metadata ...}
    }
  ]

}
```

2. A reference to the metadata as part of the extension itself

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "example.my-extension",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]

}
```

3. A complimentary reference extension

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "example.my-extension-ref",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]

}
```

4. A shared or even core reference extension

```javascript
{
  "extensions":  [
    {
      "name": "example.parent-ref",
      "configuration": {
        "reference": "../.."
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

As further experience is gained by the community of extension authors,
one or more of these methods may be adopted into the core spec.

### Alternatives for the `extensions` extension point

The current design allows having the same
extension definition syntax across all extension points and reduces pollution
of the top-level namespace in a `zarr.json`. Thus, the addition of top-level
metadata keys remains reserved to changes in the core spec. This MAY happen as
part of the core spec adopting functionality of an extension.

Alternative designs that were considered are listed below along with their
pros and cons.

#### Top-level metadata keys

Instead of a generic extension point, new top-level
extension keys could be added to the metadata::

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...
    "example.offset": { "offset": [ 12 ] },
    "example.array-statistics": {
        "min": 5,
        "max": 12
    },
    "example.consolidated-metadata": {
        "must_understand": false,
        ...
    }, // optional extension
    ...
}
```

In this case, there would be no explicit `configuration` key within an
extension definition, but instead all the keys of such a configuration would be
in the object itself. Using an object rather than directly for example
an array of values would allow for evolution of the extension.

This would mean, however, that there are two separate types of
extension definitions, i.e. `{"name":"<name>", "configuration": {...}}` in
specialized extension points (e.g. `codecs`) and `"<name>": {...}` for other
extensions.

A benefit would be that if an extension becomes adopted into the core spec, implementations
would not need to be updated to support their move from the ``extensions`` object.

#### Simple `extensions` object

Instead of an array that holds the extension definitions, an object could alternatively be used::

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...
    "extensions": {
        "example.offset": { "offset": [ 12 ] },
        "example.array-statistics": {
            "min": 5,
            "max": 12
        },
        "example.consolidated-metadata": {
            "must_understand": false,
            ...
        } // optional extension
    },
    ...
}
```

This alternative is similar to the top-level keys, with mostly the same implications.

This alternative would continue to reserve the top-level namespace for changes to
the core spec and, therefore, reduce pollution of the top-level namespace. Downsides include
that only a single use of each extension would be possible since the key is the extension
name and there would be no ordering of the extensions.

#### Complex `extensions` object

Finally, a more complex ``extensions`` object could be defined::

```javascript
{
    "zarr_format": 3,
    ...
    "extensions": {
        "version": 1,
        "contents": [
            {
                "name": "example.offset",
                "configuration": { "offset": [ 12 ] }
            },
            {
                "name": "example.array-statistics",
                "configuration: {
                    "min": 5,
                    "max": 12
                }
            },
            {
                "name": "example.consolidated-metadata",
                "must_understand": false,
                "configuration": {
                    ...
                }
            }
        ]
    },
    ...
}
```

This strategy combines the object strategy for extensibility with the uniformity
of using a list of extension definitions, at the cost of a more complex object to parse.

## Changelog

 - 2025-05-12: Migrate phase 2 of the original ZEP9

## Copyright

This proposal is licensed under [the Apache License, Version 2.0](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).
