---
layout: default
title: ZEP0003
description: Variable chunk sizes
parent: draft ZEPs
nav_order: 3
---

# ZEP 3 — Variable chunking

Authors:
* Martin Durant ([@martindurant](https://github.com/martindurant)), Anaconda, Inc.

Status: Draft

Type: Specification

Created: 2022-10-17

## Abstract

To allow the chunks of a zarr array to be rectangular grid rather than a regular grid, 
with the chunk
lengths along any dimension a list of integers rather than a single chunk size.

## Motivation and Scope

Two specific use cases have motivated this, given below. However, this generalisation of Zarr's storage
model can be seen as an optional enhancement, and the same data model as currently used by dask.array.

- when producing a [kerchunked](https://github.com/fsspec/kerchunk) dataset, the native chunking of the targets 
cannot be changed. It is common
to have non-regular chunking on at least one dimension, such as a time dimension with one sample per day and chunks 
of one month or one year. The change would allow these datasets to be read via kerchunk, and/or converted to
zarr with equivalent chunking to the original. Such data cannot currently be represented in zarr.
- [awkward](https://github.com/scikit-hep/awkward) arrays, ragged arrays and sparse data can be represented as
a set of one-dimensional arrays, with an appropriate metadata description convention. The size of a chunks
of each component array corresponding to a logical chunk of the overall array will not, in general be equal
with each other in a single chunk, nor consistent between chunks, as each row in the matrix can have a variable number
of non-zero values
- sensor data, may not come in fixed increments; variably chunked storage would be great for parallel writing. 
With variable chunk sizes, just need to make sure offsets are 
correct once done. Otherwise, write locations for chunks are dependent on previous chunks.
- in some cases, parts of the overall data array may have very different data distributions, and it can
be very convenient to partition the data by such characteristics to allow, for example, for more efficient encoding
schemes.
- when filtering regular table data on one column and applying to other columns, you necessarily end up with an unequal
number of values in each chunk, which zarr does not currently handle.

## Usage and Impact

### Creation

```python
zarr.create(1000, chunks=((100, 300, 500, 100),))
```


## Backward Compatibility


This change is fully backward compatible - all old data will remain usable. However, data written with
variable chunks will not be readable by older versions of Zarr. It would be reasonable to  wish to backport the
feature to v2.

## Detailed description

Currently, the array metadata specifies the chunking scheme like
(see https://zarr-specs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/core/v3.0.html#chunk-grid)
```json
{
  "type": "regular", 
  "chunk_shape": [10, 10],
  "separator":"/"
}
```

The proposal is to allow metadata of the form
```json
{
  "type": "rectangular", 
  "chunk_shape": [[5, 5, 5, 15, 15, 20, 35], 10],
  "separator":"/"
}
```
Each element of `chunk_shape`, corresponding to each dimension of the array, may be a single integer, as before,
or a list of integers which add up to the size of the array in that dimension. In this example, the single value
of `10` for the chunks on the second dimension would be identical to `[10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10, 10]`.
The number of values in the list is equal to the number of chunks along that dimension. Thus, a "rectangular"
grid may be fully compatible as a "regular" grid.

The data index bounds on a dimension of each hyperrectangle is formed by a cumulative sum of the chunks values, 
starting at 0.
```
bounds_axis0 = [0, 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 65, 100]
bounds_axis1 = [0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100]
```
such that key "c0/0" contains values for indices along the first dimension (0, 5] and (0, 10] on the second dimension.
An array index of (17, 17) would be found in key "c3/1", index (2, 2).

## Related Work

### Dask

`dask.array` uses rectangular chunking internally, and is one of the major consumers of zarr data. Much of the
code translating logical slices into slices on the individual chunks should be reusable.

### Parquet/ Arrow

Arrow describes tables as a collection of record batches. There is no restriction on the size of these batches. 
This is not only very flexible, but can be used as an indexing strategy for low cardinality columns within parquet.

```
dataset_name/
  year=2007/
    month=01/
       0.parq
       1.parq
       ...
    month=02/
       0.parq
       1.parq
       ...
    month=03/
    ...
  year=2008/
    month=01/
    ...
  ...
```

This feature was cited as one of the reasons parquet was chose over zarr for dask
dataframes: https://github.com/dask/dask/issues/1599

### awkward array

https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/62


## Implementation

It is to be hoped that much code can be adapted from dask.array, which already allows variable chunk sizes
on each dimension.

## Alternatives

### Just tune chunk sizes

https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/62#issuecomment-1100806513


## Discussion


## References and Footnotes

* Previous discussion:
	* [Zarr Dask Table dask/dask#1599](https://github.com/dask/dask/issues/1599)
	* [Protocol extensions for awkward arrays zarr-developers/zarr-specs#62](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/62) 
	* [Handling arrays with non-uniform chunking zarr-developers/zarr-specs#40](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/40)
	* [Chunk spec zarr-developers/zarr-spec#7](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/7#issuecomment-468127219)



## Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.
