---
layout: default
title: 7th September
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2023-09-07
grand_parent: ZEP meetings
parent: 2023 meetings
nav_order: 21
---

# 2023-09-07

**Attending:** Sanket Verma (SV), Norman Rzepka (NR), Ward Fisher (WF), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS)

## TL;DR:

The meeting introduced new ZEPs by Davis Bennett (ZEP0006) and Isaac Virshup (ZEP0007). Discussions included the possibility of hosting Zarr-Con with NASA F.15 grant support and updates on ZEP0002 progress, particularly in Tensorstore implementation. The addition of ZipStore as a ZEP was explored, with considerations for conventions, URL structures, and potential contributors from the microscopy and napari communities. Additionally, a discussion on handling non-Zarr stores by Zarr and the need for defined behaviors in case of malformed data was addressed.

**Updates:**

- ZEP0006 by Davis Bennett: <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps/pull/46>
- ZEP0007 by Isaac Virshup: <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps/pull/47>

**Meeting Minutes:**

- WF: NASA F.15 grant could help hosting Zarr-Con over at Unidata
- SV: Update on new ZEPs by Davis and Isaac
    - NR: Overview of the ZEP0007
    - WF: Character encoding addressed? - Not implemented robustly across NetCDF
    - SV: Norman as co-author?
    - NR: No, just left some comments
    - JMS: Define a name for the codec - array to bytes - can be applied to raw data buffer
    - NR: Could model it as a data type - not clear how the translation from bytes would work in a codec
    - JMS: Encourage a spec PR first - make things straightforward
    - SV: ZEP document and spec PR - anyone can come first - depends which is the clear and straightforward way to introduce the changes
- SV: ZEP0002
    - JMS: Extremely close on tensorstore
    - NR: Zarrita.js can be added to the sharding implementation in the issue review
- NR: Adding ZipStore as a ZEP
    - JMS: Added read-only support for ZipStore to tenstore
    - NR: Certain features that can be included in the ZEP - like allow different types of hierarchy
    - JMS: Various ways to use ZipStore in Zarr-Python - depends on different ways how want to organise your data in the Zip
    - NR: Maybe more of a convention - Zip on S3: How do you access it? (URL gets funky)
    - JMS: `s3://bucket/path/to/zip.zip|zip:path/to/array/|zarr3` - pipe URL - convey what's happening - `:` downsides - they're valid in a URL
    - NR: Go down further and address things further in the Zarr like array
    - WF: We have Zip support in NCZarr - not the similar URL style
    - NR: Microscopy folks - napari folks - Saalfeld could be potential people who could work on the Zip ZEP
    - NR: Protocol for Google storage? GS or GCS
    - JMS: `gs://bucket/path` - GS
    - JMS: General Zip required sequential access
    - JMS: Standardizing some kind for URL would be good thing
    - NR: Getting feedback from Ward, Stephan Saalfeld would be good
    - WF: HTTP post style syntax in NetCDF is supported
- WF: What would happen if we try to read non-Zarr store by Zarr?
    - JMS: Looking at the metadata file and then figuring it out?
    - WF: Some part of NetCDF uses HDF5 and we try to open it with Zarr and it crashed
    - WF: Curious to what the failed `open()` should look like? Having a defined behaviour would be good
    - JMS: Launch missiles if the data is malformed! 😄🚀
    - WF: NetCDF have certain error code when it can't read insted of crashing the software - should be a part of the spec
    - JMS: Could be a good addition
    - WF: Just curious about the crashing!
