---
layout: default
title: 30th November
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2023-11-30
grand_parent: ZEP meetings
parent: 2023 meetings
nav_order: 27
---

# 2023-11-30

**Attending:** Sanket Verma (SV), Ward Fisher (WF), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS)

## TL;DR:

In this meeting, discussions included Ward Fisher's virtual talk for AGU, focusing on Zarr as an archival format and its interoperability with NetCDF. There was also consideration of Zarr implementation in FORTRAN and the challenges in upgrading NetCDF FORTRAN modules. Additionally, ongoing work on ZEP48 was acknowledged, and the decision on several pull requests, including zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#276, zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#205, and zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#271, was tabled for future consideration.

**Meeting Minutes:**

- WF: Recording a virtual talk for AGU next week
    - <https://discourse.pangeo.io/t/pangeo-showcase-how-to-transform-thousands-of-cmip6-datasets-to-zarr-with-pangeo-forge-and-why-we-should-never-do-this-again/3856> - CMIP6 trying to get rid of NetCDF?
    - WF: Zarr as archival? - Trying to be there - much younger format - but NetCDF is a robust archival format
    - SV: The interoperablility b/w Zarr and NetCDF is a good thing in here
    - WF: 
- WF: Zarr implementation in FORTRAN?
    - JMS: Are people writing FORTRAN actively?
    - WF: Yes - The latest book on FORTRAN came last year - NCZarr is supported via FORTRAN
    - JMS: Zarr V3 FORTRAN would be good
    - WF: NetCDF FORTRAN is used by supercomputers across US
    - SV: Why end NetCDF FORTRAN?
    - WF: Selfish reasons - takes a lot of time fixing the modules
    - SV: Why supercomputers still use FORTRAN?
    - WF: Supercomputers unparalleled performance using FORTRAN is just great!
    - WF: E.g. Mathworks upgrading to newer NetCDF version is a long process
    - WF: 
- Good to go with? 
    - [zarr-developers/zeps/#48](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zeps/pull/48)
        - JMS: Still need to work on this - also work on the implementation of the ZEP
- TABLED
    - Let's go ahead with [zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#276](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/276)?
    - Thoughts on [zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#205](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/205)
    - Good to go with? 
        - [zarr-developers/zarr-specs/#271](https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/271)
