---
layout: default
title: 5th October
description: ZEPs Meeting Notes for 2023-10-05
grand_parent: ZEP meetings
parent: 2023 meetings
nav_order: 23
---

# 2023-10-05

**Attending:** Sanket Verma (SV), Josh Moore (JM), Thomas Nicholas (TN), Jonathan Striebel (JS), Jeremy Maitin-Shepard (JMS)

## TL;DR:

In this meeting, attendees shared their favorite books as a fun introduction. The discussions revolved around various GitHub issues and pull requests, including considerations for making a store less explicit, clarifying certain points, and addressing implementation details. Jeremy Maitin-Shepard highlighted the successful 100% V3 implementation in Neuroglancer and Tensorstore, while Thomas Nicholas expressed interest in performance improvements, particularly regarding variable chunking in Zarr-Python. Plans to finalize ZEP0003 for voting were also mentioned.

**Meeting Minutes:**

- Introductions with favourite book
    - SV: ASOF by GRR Martin
    - TN: Dispossessed
    - JS: Hitchhicker's Guide to Galaxy
    - JM: Kingkiller Triology (Rothfuss) — can HIGHLY recommend. Beware: only 2 of the 3 books is written.
- Issues and PRs to look at:
    - <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/266>
        - JS and JMS: Mostly an implementation detail
        - JMS: Make store less explicit
        - JS: Should not enforce the parameter; will send a PR after 2 weeks 
    - <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/issues/241>
        - JMS: Will try to make it more clear
    - <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/263>
        - JMS: Chris Barnes' implementation hasn't made the change yet
        - SV: Send an email for this to ZIC
- JMS: <https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-specs/pull/264>
    - JS: Fortran array needs to be inverted
    - JMS: C and Fortran array are contiguous in different ways
- JMS: Neuroglancer and Tensorstore has 100% V3 implementation 🎉
    - Working on some CI issues and will merge it
- JM: https://github.com/ome/ngff/pull/206
- TN: Cubed discussions
    - Anything which increases the performance would be useful - interested in Jack's work
    - How can we get variable chunking into Zarr-Python?
    - SV: Needs to finalise the ZEP0003 - will go into voting soon!
